# Chapter 4

Chapter I



I. Prince chs.r   beginning,2   begin- ning and 8 beginning.
2. Discourses   I  17,49,55    (21I),I
2 beginning.Numbers     in     parentheses indicate  the  pages   of  the   edition   of Machiavelli's    Opere    edited    by    F. Flora     and     C.Cordié(Arnoldo    Mon-
da o 1h4 - D5ic. there  are  only
2 chapters of 142 which contain only modern   examples    (I   27   and   54) whereas  in  the  Prince  there   are   8 chapters  of  26   which  contain  only modern    examples.Conversely    there is  no  chapter  in  the  Prince  which contains only ancient examples where- as  there  are  at  least  6o  chapters  in the  Discourses   which   contain   only ancient   examples.
4. Discourses      I     pr,55(213),II     4 towards   the   end,I5   end,33   end.
5. Discourses     I    pr.Cf.,apart    from

the  numerous   chapter  headings   in which both republics and princes are mentioned,especially   I   16(138-I39), I 24(300-301),III r towards the end,
3- 46..Prince            chs.3,5,9(3I),Io(35), I2,I   3  towards the     end,I7(      54),2I     (7I-72).
7. La   Mandragola  III  2; Prince  ch.
25     (heading     and     beginning);Dis- courses   I   38   towards   the   end,56,II 5,III        r        beginning,6(346),30(41o), 3I(413).
8.Fl orentine    Histories  VII  6.
9.  Prince   chs.3(6),10(35-36);
Discourses    I    I2,57,58,III    8,36    near the       beginning."Nature"is       mentioned in    only    one    chapter   heading    in   the two   books,in   Discourses   III  43,which   is  the   136th   chapter   of  the   book.—At the   beginning   of   the   first   chapter   of the  Prince     Machiavelli   gives   a   divi-




》302《
sion      of“all      states,all      dominions”into principalities    and    republics.“All     states, all      dominions”comprise      more      than the     principalities     and     republics     "of which       there       exists       memory”-ch.4 (13) 一；they    include    also    the    imagi-  nary     principalities     and     republics     of which    he    speaks    in    ch.I5:the    proof of   their    essentially    imaginary    charac- ter  is  in  fact  a  most  important  part  of the   argument   of   the   Prince.
ro. Prince              chs.3(8-9),7(20),25
beginning;   Discourses     I    pr.,II    pr.
(228),5,II      r      beginning,43      begin- ning.
II.  Discourses  III  35  beginning.
I2.E.g.,I       40,III       6,8.Cf.note       5
above.
13. Prince chs.6   and   I3.
14. Cf.Discourses II   pr. (230)  with I   9.
15.Cf.note      3      above.
16.Di scourses  I  58  end;Prince    ch.
18  toward  the  end.
I7.In   the   Epistle   Dedicatory   to the Discourses Machiavelli substitutes “long practice”for  “long  experience” which  he  had  used  in  the  Epistle Dedicatory  to  the  Prince:Machia-    velli's practice was  "republican”; ex- perience could have been acquired by an   onlooker.In   the   Epistle   Dedi- catory   to   the   Prince   Machiavelli merely  alludes  to  his practice:he  re- fers  to  the  many   discomforts   and perils  under  which  he  had  acquired
hi 8exsre.s  II  18(28r).As       for
"rules”and“general     rules,"cf. Prince chs.3(II,I3),9(33)and      23      towards the   end,with   Discourses    I    9(II9), 18   near   the   beginning,III   22(393), Cf.Art     of    War     I(463)and     VII (612).
I9.Cf.Discourses    I   4,12,4I,II    ro, 17,III    3, 4.
20. Discourses        I       8(II7),II(I27), 45(I92),53(206),II         5(247),III        27
(404),29             end,30(41o),43(436).
2I.Discourses      I      44(I9o),46(I93),
II          16(27I-272),18(28o).
22. Cf. the letter to  Vettori  of  De-

NOTES

cember   I0,I513   with    Prince      chs.6 and   14(the   greatest   examples   or   the most  exalted  examples  are  ancient  ex- amples).Cf.the      reference      to      “an- cients    and    moderns”in    the    Epistle Dedicatory  to  the  Prince.
23. Prince         ch.I9      end;Discourses      I
9(120),58(220).Cf.                     Florentine Historie   s   III   6.
24.Cf.   Prince     ch.2   and   the   remark about    the    virtue     of    the    hereditary right    of   Marcus    Aurelius    and    Com- modus    in    ch.I9    with    Discourses    I  2 (99),Io(I23),I9-20.
25. Cf.Pr  ince ch.  I9  and Discourses I   10:see   especially   in   Prince  ch.I9    the   characteristic   phrase   Voglio    mi basti near  the  beginning  of the  discus- sion  of  the  Roman  emperors:Machia-
velli  draws  our  attention  to  the   arbi- trary  character  of  his   selecting  these particular    emperors.
26.Cf.Nabis    in    Prince    ch.9   and Discourses  I  1o,40;Petrucci  in  Prince  ch.20  and  Discourses  III  6;Caesar  in Prince ch.16  and  Discourses  I    I0,37; King  David  in Prince   ch.I3  and  Dis- courses I   25-26.As   for   Agathocles,cf. Prince   ch.8   with   Justinus  XXII  r.In describing   Agathocles   and   Liverotto in   the   Prince           (ch.8),Machiavelli tacitly  describes  them  in  the  way  in which    Aristotle    explicitly    describes tyrants:Machiavelli    only    tacitly    de- scribes  them  as  tyrants.
27. Discourses      I    40,III    6,8.
28.Cf.especially       Prince     ch.26    be- ginning,with      the      parallel      in      Dis- courses       III     34(420).
29. Prince   chs .8,    9,I9;      Discourses
III  6(345);Justinus  XXIII  2.—In  the first    chapter    of   the   Prince    he   men- tions  as  examples  only  Milan  and Naples;in   ch.23   Milan   and   Naples prove  to  be  the  outstanding  examples of  principalities   lost   in   Machiavelli's time.
30.Cf.P  rince     ch.I9(59-6o)where Machiavelli  speaks  of  a  conspiracy which happened "within the memory of our  fathers”with  Discourses III  6 (343)where  he  speaks  of  the  con-



NOTES
spiracy of the Pazzi which took place
"in  our  times."Cf.likewise  the  praise
in the Prince,loc.   cit.,of  the   French
kingdom with the blame of all mod-
ern monarchies in the  Art  of  War  I
(458-459).
3I.  Prince     ch .5       end;    Discourses
II            6(345,351-352); Florentine      His- tories    VII   33 ·
32. Princ e      chs.6      (19)    and     18; Discourses   III   35   beginning; Floren-   tine   Histories  VI  17. Cf.Pr  ince  ch.3
(a  remark  made  by  Machiavelli  to  a  French     Cardinal)a   nd      ch.7(a      re- mark    made    by    Cesare    Borgia    to Machiavelli)with     Discourses     II     16 (a  remark  made  only  in  Machiavelli's presence).
33.Discourses    II     1o.Machiavelli could  have  quoted  an  explicit  state- ment   of   Livy(IX   40.6)in    support of his opinion about money.If some- one would  object  that  this  statement is made, not by Livy, but by a Livian character,I   would  refer  him  to  Dis- courses III  I2  toward  the  end, where  Machiavelli ascribes  to  Livy   an  ex- pression used by  a  Livian   character.
34.In   ch.7   of   the   Prince  Cesare Borgia had come to sight as the model of  a  new  prince;in   ch.II  he  is  re- vealed to  have  been  a  mere  tool  of Pope  Alexander  VI, his   father  (cf. Discourses III  29).
35. Florentine   Histories     V1:letters and    philosophy    belong    to  “decent  leisure.”This“     decent    leisure” whose  beneficiaries   while  giving  occasion  to persecution ,abhor       persecution,seems to   be   the   pagan   counterpart   of   the “ambitious    leisure” characteristic  ,ac-   cording     to     Machiavelli,of     "many  Christian   countries      and    states”(Dis-
co sn i r. ).in  this   connection  the
similar  phrasing  of  the  charge  against
Caesar  in  Di scourses   I   ro (I24)and
of the  charge   against  the  Church    in I       12(I30):  the“obligations”which
Italy   has   against   Caesar   and   against the    Church.
37. Discourses  II     pr.(227),23   (298),

》303《
III  2.
38. Discourses      I     pr.,II     2(238),III 35(42I-422);      Prince   ch.6(I9).
39. Discourses  II  29:"Fortuna  some-
times  blinds   the   minds   of  men”; the
expression  used  in  III  48  “the  desire
to  conquer  blinds  the  minds  of men”
might  by  itself  remind  the  reader  of
II  29  where  Machiavelli  gives  a  con- tradictory    explanation    of   the    same event  as  in  III  48.(III  48  is  the  52nd chapter    of    the    series    of    chapters which  begins   after   II  29).
40.Letter  to  Vettori  of  April  29, 1513(beginning).Cf.    Art  of  War   V (564-565)and     VII(606-607).
41.Letter  to  Guicciardini  of  May I7,I52I.Cf.         Discourses    I    13    end  with   III   40-42.
42.Machiavelli     indicates     the     diffi- culty    by    saying    in    I    28:"he    then,
who    will    consider    as    much  as  has  been   said,"(i.e   .,  he    who    disregards, among    other    things,the    Decemvirate)
will   agree   with   Machiavelli's   explana- tion.
43.Discourses    I₂(10o)and    5(I05- ro6).-In   Discourses I 20 Machiavelli says  that  since  the  Roman  consuls owed their  office  to  free  votes,"they were   always   most   excellent   men." This  is  again  a  temporary  overstate- ment  of the  goodness  of the Roman republic;it    is    tacitly    contradicted later   on(cf.I   24   end,50,53,III    17, to  say  nothing of I 35  beginning). 一 Cf4.4th iicrrsenstenc  of I1I(I403,20,25- 26,58(217),II            pr.(228).
45.Cf.note     I9      above.
46.Cf.letter  to  Vettori  of  January I3,I514       with      Florentine   Histories
VIII  36.
47.Nietzsche     ,Froehliche          Wissen- schaft,   aph.   I.
48.These   remarks   are,of   course, quite  insufficient  for  the  full  inter- pretation of Discourses  III   18.Since we  do  not  intend  to  give  a  full  in- terpretation   of   this   chapter   or  of any   other   chapter  (for   considering the  interdependence  of  all  chapters,



》304《
this  could  only  be  done  in  a  com- mentary consisting of many volumes), we  merely  note  that  the  parallelism of  the   four  examples(twice  an  an- cient example is followed by a mod- ern  example)conceals  the  fact  that the  fourth  example  is  in  a  class  by itself,since  no  error  whatsoever  was committed  in  the  event  with  which it  deals.Of the  first  three  examples, two  are pagan  and  one  is  Christian, the  latter  being  in  the  center.In  the Roman examples,the Romans errone- ously  believed  that  they  had  been defeated(in    the    first    example,the Romans despair of their salvation but in  the  third   example  the   Romans while erroneously believing that they had   lost,believe   correctly   that   by withdrawing to very nearby hills they will be temporarily secure);the mod- erns,on   the   other   hand,believe   er- roneously in victory or even in false news about victory.In the second and fourth  examples,the  alleged  victory is  explicitly  stated to have been  an- nounced  either  orally  or  in  writing.
49.Plato,     Rivals    I33    d8-el    (cf. I34C   I-5).
50.As regards the pre-history of
 Art v. s,3,Persecution    and
5I. Discourses    I    I2(262):le    ra-
gioni  are  distinguished  from  le  cose
dette;the   arguments   from   authority
were  called ragioni  near  the  begin-
ning   of  the   chapter.The   argument
taken  from  the  poetic  fables  is  fol-
lowed  immediately  by  an  argument
taken   from“modern  judgments.”
52.This  step  is  prepared  by  II  16 (27I)where  Machiavelli  refers  twice to  “Tuscan”equivalents  of  Latin  ex- pressions.
53. Discourses  II    8(253). Cf.O  pere
II  517.
54.See   the   very   favorable  judg- ment  on  Caesar  in  Discourses  I   52 and in Prince    ch.I4(Caesar“an    ex- cellent    man”).Cf.the    analysis    of Manlius'policy  in  the  light  of  the distinction  between  corrupt  and  un-

NOTES

corrupt       cities(Discourses     III    8)with the   different   analysis   in   Discourses   I 8.
..Cf..aDlcous 9  d 2F-.
tuna)with   the   repetition   in   IIIr(ex-
trinsic     accident);also   cf.I   58(the
people  are  wiser  than  a  prince)with
the explicit re-examination of the the-
sis   of  that   chapter   in   III   34(the
important qualification "when peoples
can  be  advised  as  princes  are  ad-
vised").=What  is  true  of  the  discus-
sion of founders in Discourses   I,ap-
plies also  to  the  other  chief  subject
of    that     Book,namely,religion  (cf.
I  9  beginning).Religion  is  discussed
explicitly  in  I  II-I5; it  is  taken  up
in a more or less disguised way first
in I  19-24,then in I 28-32,and finally
in I 46-59,the section devoted to the
multitude   or   plebs;for,according   to
Machiavelli,the   multitude  as  distin-
guished   from“princes”is   the   home
of    religion(cf. Prince   ch.I8   toward
the   end).The  primary   subject   of  I
I9-24  is  Tullus  Hostilius  who  is  the
counterpart   of   the  religious   Numa
Pompilius   and  who   is   described,in
contrast  with  the“weak  king”Numa,
as  a  man  of  outstanding  virtue  and
as  "most prudent."After having over-
stated the prudence of Tullus in order
to underline the contrast with Numa,
he  reduces  this  praise  to  reasonable
proportions  in  I  22-24.The  primary
subject  of I 28-32  is  gratitude;as re-
gards  the  relation  of  gratitude   and
religion,cf.   Machiavelli's Esortazione
al a7p.eonuzreOpeIrIe II 28o(r3-1830)4;c)f.III
20(388)and        21(390).
58.Toward  the  end  of  the  eighth  chapter   of   the   Prince   Machiavelli  speaks  of“cruelty  well  used”and  ex- cuses himself for  employing this  ex- pression;at   the   beginning   of   ch.I7  he  speaks  of“the  bad  use  of mercy” without excusing himself any further. Toward  the  end  of  ch.6,he   speaks  of Hiero's  dissolving  the  old  militia; in  ch.I3,he  tells  us  that  Hiero  had



NOTES

these   soldiers   cut   to   pieces.At   the  end   of   ch.I8   he   does   not   yet   dare  to   mention   the   name   of   Ferdinand  of  Aragon;at   the   beginning   of  ch.2I  he   does   dare   to   do   so.In   ch.3(7), he   speaks   first   of   the   necessity   of  extinguishing   the   “line”of   a   prince, and  thereafter  of  the  necessity  of  ex- tinguishing    his     “blood.”Cf.also     ch. 4(15)where       he       replaces“memory” by“blood.”"Blood”is      a     very     deli- cate     matter;hence     it     occurs     only  once  in a  chapter    heading (Di scourses  III   7)and   there   only   in   the   expres-
sion“without
59. Cf.note
6o.Cf.page    32    above.
61.In this  connection we may note that    Machiavelli    distinguishes    in Prince  ch.3  (I2)between“someone”
raising  a  certain  objection  and"some others”raising    another   objection;the first  objection  is  political,the  second one  is moral.
62. Prince                   ch.I9(61,62,65,66)
and   20(67);cf.Discourses   I   ro(I23)
and  40(187)as  well  as  Art  of  War
I(Opere   I   476).The   connection   be-
tween   that   chapter   of   the   Prince
which  deals  explicitly  with  crime  as
a  way  to  princely  power (ch.8)   and
ch.I9  is  indicated  by  the   fact  that
both  chapters,and  no  other  chapter,
begin  with   the   words   Ma   perché.
Incidentally,there   are   four   chapters
of  the Prince  which  begin  with  Ma
(But)whereas  no  chapter  of  the  Dis-
courses  begins  with  that  word.The
equivalent  within  the   Discourses  is
the  beginning  with  Ancora  che (Al-
though)of  which   we   likewise   find
four     cases(Discourses    I    pr.32,55,
III 40):  the  tempo  of  the  two  books
is  very  different.In  order  to  see  the
special  significance  of the  discussion
of  Severus,one  should  also  compare
Machiavelli's judgment  on his  appar-
ent hero Cesare Borgia with his judg-

》305《
64.Cf.   Discourses  I 46-47 whose
chapter  headings  begin  with“Human
beings.”
65. Discourses  I  56.
66.Cf.  e.g., I      ro,II      I,8-9,30(3I7), III    6,24-25.Our    attention    is    drawn  to   the   number   of   chapters   of   the Discourses    by   the   following   striking  irregularity:Whereas   Books   I   and   II  have   a   preface,Book   III   does   not;  the  effect  or  the  cause  of  this  irregu- larity   is   that   the   Discourses   consist  of    I42     chapters.It     was     common  knowledge   that   Livy's   History   con-  sisted      of      142      books;cf.Petrarca,  .ioilade8.r,eas aelmiarmibms,lbrrn-  darum     liber    I.paragraph     18.(I    am  obliged   for   this   information   to   Mr. A.H.Mc  Donald  of Clare  College,  Cambridge.)
67.I        Kings        3.I4;Luke        I.53.Cf. Luke     I.5I-52     with     Aristotle, Politics   I314    a    I-29   (apud     tyrannos     autem  adulatores    bonorati    sunt    quia    humil- iter   colloquuntur     etc.)
68. Prince   chs.6  and   18; Discourses
III   30(409).Machiavelli   has    incor- porated into his books infinitely more of   such“judicious   readings”of   the Bible than is immediately visible.This assertion  is  not  contradicted  by  the fact  that  he  refers  explicitly  to  the Bible  only  once.He  also  refers  ex- plicitly   to  Aristotle   only   once,and it   would  be   unintelligent   to   infer from this that he has not given care- ful  consideration  to  Aristotle's  doc- trine.Each  of  the  two  most  authori- tative "texts,"the Bible and Aristotle, is  indeed  mentioned  only  once  eo nomine.   Aristotle   is   mentioned   in Discourses III   26(the   only   mention of Aristotle  is  followed by the  only quotation from a contemporary prose writer-Biondo-in     III     27)and    the Bible is mentioned in III 30(the only mention of the Bible is preceded by the only quotation from a contempo- a9r)y. etSvLoraerno ea’cieadvieclil-iinsaIsI that  his  writings  show  his  learning,



》306《
his   prudence,and   the   virtue   of   his mind;of  King  David  he  says  that  he was  a  man  most  excellent  in  arms, in  learning    and    in    judgment,and    be- sides   of   outstanding   virtue:he   does not   refer   to   David's   writings;cf.Dis- courses  I  r9 (147)  and     45(I92).   (Cf.  the   similarly   phrased   judgment    on


NOTES

Dante  in  the  Discorso  o   Dialogo    in- torno    alla    lingua    nostra,  Opere     II 808.)
6g. Discourses  III  I2  beginning,
70.Di  scourses     I   1o.
7I.  Discourses      Ⅱ      3,23,III      1o.
72.Cf.note      54      above.
