# Chapter 6

Chapter Ill




r. Discourses  I     pr.,II     2(237-238), 19 (285)  and   III   27(403-404);cf.III
30(41o)and       3I  (413).
2. Discourses      I   pr.,II   5   and   II   30 (41o).Cf.        La       Mandragola.
3. Discours  es,Ep.Ded.and          I          pr. Cf.II         22(293)a   nd    II    r    toward    the end.
4.See     especially     Discourse s    II    2.
5.Di scourses   III   17   and   25.
6. Discourses  I   20. Cf.II        19(285, 288), 21   beginning   and   32(324).The date  suggested  in  the  last  mentioned passage    almost    coincides    with    the date    at   which   the   first   decade   of Livy   ends.Cf.Opere   I   683.
7.I        26,30,II   3I,III         32,35,40,43 and    44.Cf.ch.I,note    3    above.
8.The     shortest     chapter(I     48)has an   unusually    long    chapter   heading (34  words);there  are  only  two  other  chapters(I    3I    and  34)whose   head- ings  are  of  equal  length.
9. Prediche sopra Ezechiele, X.  Cf.
Discourses  II  5.
1o.I      r(95),58(217),      II     pr.(228)
and    5(247).O  pere  II  7II.
II. Discourses   II   2(235)and   4-5. Cf.Livy   V   1.6   with   Discourses   I 4 end:while  the  power  and  glory  of the ancient Tuscans was destroyed  by Rome,the  same  cannot  be  said  of their  religion.

I2.Ir(94-9         5),2     (100-IO1)and       9  (I20).Cf.      Prince,   chs.6(18)and            I3 (43).In       Discourses      I    I,the    chapter  on     the     building     of     cities,Machia- velli     mentions     repeatedly     Alexander the     Great,who     appears     from     I     19 and  26  as  a  parallel  to  King  Solomon, but    he     does    not    mention     Solomon in    that    chapter,although    he    too    was a builde  r   of   cities  (I    Kings   9.I7-19).
13.Discourses      I      2,4      and      6.Cf.
I        I2(372-373).
14. Discourses    I   2(IOI-102),3   be-   ginning  and  4.By  speaking  of  classi-  cal     political     philosophy,I     remain  closer   to   Machiavelli   than   do   those  interpreters   who   speak   of   Polybius:  Machiavelli   does   not   mention   Poly-  bius.Cf.also    I    2(98)where    he    ex-  presses  his  opinion  about  the  classical  doctrine  by  imputing  to  it  an  inferior  rhetoric     (facilmente,     con     facilità,
sanza   difficultà).—As   for   Machiavel- li's      praise      of     discord,cf.Plutarch,
A5es iDlaio s-4.I   5-6.
16.Discourses II 3I (cf.Livy   VIII  24.18).Neither II 26 nor I 26 contain modern examples while each of these chapters contains an Asiatic example.
III  26  also  does  not  contain  modern examples.-I  3   beginning,39  begin- ning  and  I   16(270).





》3I2《
17. Discourse s     I     I     end,II     pr.end and  III    r  end. Cf.  I   I5   end.
18.I13(referring    to    I    39);I    29 (referring  to  II);I  47   end(referring to III 28);II  22 (referring  to  III  16);
II  23  end(referring  to  III  4I-42);II
26(referring  to  III  6,the  chapter  on
conspiracies;cf.the     somewhat     dif-
ferent reference to the  same  chapter
in   II   20).The   connection   between
the themes  of I  24  and  25  is  estab-
lished  by  the  fact  that  both  themes
were mentioned in a single Florentine
maxim,as  appears  from  III  27(403)
and Prince, ch. 20(67);  starting  from
this maxim,Machiavelli looks out for
Livian passages which he can use as
pegs on which to hang his discussion
of the  themes; the  passages in ques-
tion  occur  in  widely  separated  parts
of Livy.(II 25 is the chapter contain-
ing the unique reference to what had
been said on the same subject in an-
other  chapter  and"for  another  pur-
pose.”)Near  the  beginning  of  III  I3,
Machiavelli speaks of what Livy says
about    a    certain"place,"i.e.topic(lo-
cus) as distinguished  from  a“place”
in Livy;see on the other hand the ref-
erence   to“many   places   of(Livy's)
history”a   few   lines   afterwards,and
to“many   places”in   Livy   near   the
beginning of III  14.Note in III 26 the
contrast   between   the   reference   to
"this   [Livian]text"and   the  reference
to  "the chapter in which we treat of
conspiracies."Cf.  also the use of “in
its   place”in   the   chapter   on   con-
spiracies-III   6(339)-for   referring   to
other  places  within  that  chapter;that
chapter is a regular treatise by itself
an9 tIsIIplan6 4o2f).cSouse   enirsecluMrseas-
ivelil'tse.ly   following   one   another
are explicitly connected with a view
to the  fact  that  they are  discourses
occasioned by the  same  Livian  text;
see I  40-43,53-54,and III 26-27.
20. I  9  beginning  and   15  end(cf.I
I  end).
21.By references to Livy,I under-

NOTES
stand   both   Latin   quotations  from  Livy  regardless  of  whether   or  not  they   are    introduced   as   statements from  Livy,and  summaries  or  indica-  tions of Livian passages introduced by  expressions like “Livy says,'“our his-  torian  says,""the history  shows,""the  text   says,""the   history   of  Horatius  Cocles,"“one   reads" etc.: the  use of  a Livian passage does not yet consti-  tute  a  reference  to  Livy.For  estab-  lishing the sequence of references to  Livy,I   take   into   account   only   the  first    reference,if   more    than    one  reference  occurs  in  a  given  chapter  (I  do  not  regard  as  a  reference  to  Livy   the   formula   of   the   Senatus  consultum ultimum, which  is  quoted  in I 34.)-The  references  to  Livy  in  I I-15 lead us in a very irregular way  from  Livy  II  to  Livy  X;if  one  con-  siders what has been indicated in ch.  I note 56 above,one may understand  why the references to Livy  in  I  16-  6o do no longer lead up to the end of  Li . h.e  expression  "in  the  follow-  ing  chapter( s)”   occurs   26  times  at  or near the end of the chapter.(Only  in  I7  cases.can   the  expression pos-  sibly have the function of indicating  the  beginning  or  the  end  of  a  sec-  tion.)In this connection we may note  that  I3  chapters   of   the  Discourses  begin  with  the  first  person  of  the  personal  pronoun.
23.Statius,   Silvae  I  I  V.22.
24. Every  reader  of the Discourses can   see  that  I  II-I5,I6-18,I9-24,25- 27 and 28-32 form separate sections. (This does not contradict our remark  that  there  is  no  manifest  plan  in  I 16-60:a  clear  division  into  sections does not by itself reveal  a plan,since such  a  division  does  not  necessarily reveal  the  reason  for  the  sequence of   the    sections.)We   observe   that the expression “in the following chap- ter(s)”occurs    at or near the end of I  14,16,22,25    ,2  6  and  28; the  ex- pression  as  used  at  the  end  of I  22 links  that  chapter  with  the  two  fol-




NOTES

lowing   chapters;hence   the    expression in  question  links  the  last  chapters  or the   first   chapters   of   a   section.Since the   expression   occurs   again   at   the ends  of  I   47  and  of  I   58,we  tenta- tively  assume  that  either  I  47  is  the beginning  of  a  section  or  I  48  is  the end  of  a  section,and  that  I  59  is  the end    of    another     section.Expressions to   the   effect   that   the   subject   to   be discussed   in   the   immediate sequel is “not   foreign  to (my)   purpose”occur
at  the  beginning  of  I  I3, the  central  chapter   of   a   section,and   at   the   be- ginning  of  I  18,the  last  chapter  of  a section.Since   such   expressions   occur again  near  the  beginnings  of  I  46  and of I 55 and at the end of I 58,and since the  expression  as  used  at  the  end  of I  58  refers  to  the  subject  matter  of I  59,we  tentatively  assume  that  I  46 and  I  59  are  ends  of  sections  while abstaining   for   the   time   being    from trying  to  guess  what  the  use  of  that expression   means   in   I   55.We   note however  in  passing  that  such  expres- sions   occur   only   three   times   at   the end  of  a  chapter:at  the  end  of  I  58, the  second  chapter  before  the  last  in I,at the end of I 3I,the second chap- ter  before  the  last  in  II,and  at  the end  of  II  5 where  it helps to  intro- duce   the   chapter   on   conspiracies which is the g9th chapter of the Dis- courses. Another   hint   regarding  the plan  of I  is  provided  by  the  quota- tions from Dante and his guide Virgil. Each poet  is  quoted  twice  in  I; first they  are  quoted  in  widely  separated chapters,Dante   in   I   II   and   Virgil in  I  2I; the  second  quotations  occur in  two  subsequent   chapters   which immediately  precede  I  55:Dante  is quoted  in  I  53  and   Virgil  in  I  54; the sections within which these quo-
a6t-i5o9n) ealo ccith(I    f-m,In-al,yand the
same   theme.Furthermore,             we      men-
tion   here   the  expression   "everyone knows,"which first occurs densely in I  56  and  whose  occurrence  in  other passages-I      2I,23,24,29-            helps     us

》3I3《
to  discern  the  meaning  of  the  con- texts  in  question.Finally,considering the   special   significance  which  the number I3 has in Machiavelli's work, we are not ashamed to note that the I3th  and  the  26th  chapter  are  un- questionably  centers  of  sections;we assume  therefore  tentatively  that  I 39  and  I  52  are  centers  of sections. But,to  repeat,the  decision  regarding assumptions  suggested  by  hints,de- pends  in the  last resort  on the  con- sideration of the subject matter alone. On  the  basis  of  such  consideration, wI:Ie)oi enodf thctietstieis mtt  pieonft antiquity):II;2)the         polity:I         2-8;
3)founders:I                    9-I0;4)religion:I II-15;six   further   sections   dealing   al- ternately   with   founders   and   religion (I            16-18,I9-24,25-27,28-32,33-45, 46-59);II)earliest        youth:I        6o.The division  indicated  at  the  beginning  of I               9(founders,religion,militia)will then  refer  to  the  subject  matter  of  51 chapters   of   I(founders   and   religion) and   to   that   of   II(militia).Cf.   pages
43 454Ib vteh.e  beginning  in  question ends  with  the  I5th  chapter,in  II  it ends  with  the  roth  chapter  at  the latest. Cf. the  explicit  remark  about Machiavelli's plan in I  9 beginning, with the equivalent in II 6 beginning. The status of the Livy references in I  I-Io  is  underlined  by  the  unusual, though  not unique,frequency  of ref- erences to authors other than Livy in that  group  of chapters.
26.The number of Latin quotations
from Livy in I is 17;in II it is 2I;and
in  III  it  is  31.The  number  of chap-
ters containing Latin quotations from
Livy  in  I  is  9;the  number  of  such
20. In the first 39 chapters of  I, there
are  only  3  chapters  which  contain
Latin   Livy     quotations;i.e.on     the
average  one  chapter  in  every  group
of I3 chapters contains a Latin Livy
quotation;in     the  rest   of  I(40-6o)
there occur I3 Latin Livy quotations.



》3I4《
27.Thus   he   indicates   that   II   7-IO belong  to  a  different  section  than  II I-5,and  that  new  sections  begin  with
II    II,I9,23,with    or    before    28,and with    33.The    only    parallel    to    this procedure in I is the  sequence of Livy references  in  I  15  and  16.
28.II            I,4,II,16,I9,and            31.            
29.II     17     beginning,3I    beginning and   end.The   purport   of   the   expres- sion  as  used  in  II  3I  beginning  has been  explained  on  pages  96-97  above.
30.Cf.the   density   of   this    expres- sion    in    II    2I(292)with    the    only other   case   of   this   kind,viz.I   56;also
II   I2(261). 一There    are   no   explicit
references   to   Dante   in   the   Second
Book  which  consists  of  33  chapters.
3I.At   the   beginning   of   I   8,and nowhere else in the book,Machiavelli uses  the  expression"not  alien  to  the matter.”“Matter”occurs  in  no  chap- ter more frequently than three times. The  term  occurs  three  times  in  II 8,I    58,and    in    I    I7(the    density    of
“matter”in   I    17   is   underlined   by   the fact     that     in     I      18“matter”is     used once    and    is    twice    replaced    by"sub- ject.”)The    density    of   the    term    “mat- ter”in    the    Prince   occurs      in     chs.I9- 20.
32.Cf.I   28   end,29   beginning   and
42  beginning.
33.I    r    end    and    g    beginning,II    pr. end.
34.II   2(238).The   expression   "un-
armed   heaven"reminds   one   of"the
unarmed prophet”alluded to in Prince
ch.6.In    Discourses  II   18,when  dis-
cussing “the sins of Italian princes”(a
subject    connected   with   "the    un-
armed    prophet”Savonarola),Machia-
velli   calls   these   princes"unarmed."
Cf.also   the   reference   to“unarmed”
modern peoples  and  to"the  unarmed
heart"as distinguished from "the well
armed  heart”in  I  30.At  the  end  of
I  15,Machiavelli  refers  back  to  I  38
where  he  had  called  the  Florentines
between   "the  true    way"as   shown
by"our   religion”and"the   true   way

NOTES

of    making     a    republic    great":II    2
(237)and            I9(286).II            15,where Machiavelli    makes    a    distinction   be- tween     a     certain“matter”and     a     cer- tain  historical     event,is       devoted, ac- cording     to        its        heading,to"weak states."



NOTES

passions);8)II     33 (the  Ciminian  For-
est).  The   provisional  headings given
to these  sections will be replaced by
the  final  formulations  as  soon  as  the
necessary   preparations    have    been
completed.At    present    we    merely
add   these   three   remarks.The   first
ten    chapters    of   I    deal    with"the
causes”of   modernity    while    osten-
sibly  dealing  only  with  the  Roman
procedures  in  regard  to aggrandize-
ment   and   warfare;cf.the   references
o,an“aees”idneiy heoafdin“u ”  h,8e,
beginning   of   I   9.The   key   to   the
plan of II is II  19-22,just  as  the key
to  the  plan  of  I  was  I  I9-24;for  the
understanding  of II  I9-22  one  has  to
contrast the discussion of the German
cities  in  I  I9  with  the  parallel  in  I
55,and one has to consider the paral-
lels  between  II  2I  and  I  56.The  last
section  of  II  corresponds  to  the  last
section  of  I  as  is  indicated  by  the
fact  that  they  are  the  only  sections
of the   Discourses  which  consist  of
one chapter  only;the  purport  of these
sections  is  revealed,to  the  extent  to
which  it  is  revealed,by  the  last  sec-
tion  of III;the  correspondence  of the
end of II and the end of I is indicated
by  the  following  features: the  second
person  plural   of  the  personal  pro-
noun  occurs  in  the  Discourses  only
in  I  58(22I) and  in  II  30(317), apart
from  the  Ep.Ded. ;Machiavelli speaks
of“  occult   virtue”  in  the  Discourses
only  in  I  58(2I9)and   in  II 32(323);
cf. also  the  reference  to  ciascuno  dì
in I 59 beginning,II  3I  beginning,and
III   49   beginning   (cf.I   49   end),as well as the use of the expression "not foreign   to  (my)purpose”in     I      58 end and in II 3I  end.
37. Discourses III begins like I with a series of explicitly connected chap- ters,the meaning  of which  in  Machi-
avelli's  own  plan  is  clear,at  least  as regards the first 8 chapters  of  III(cf. the  density  of"in  the  next  chapter" occurring  at  the  ends  of  chapters  in II   3-I0  with  the  only  other  case  of

》3I5《
this    kind,i.e.with    I    2-8);hence    the Livy   references   occurring   in   this group  of chapters  do  not  follow  the
Livian  order;see  especially  the  fla- grant disregard of the Livian order in the announcement of the first subject of the  Third  Book  in  III  I  end.(In the other series of connected chapters in III—I9-23-the Livian order is like- wise   disregarded.)    II   resembles   I also by  containing  a  large  group  of chapters in which Machiavelli's plan is  obscure  and  at  the  same  time  the Livian order is  strictly adhered to as far  as  the  Livy  references  are  con- cerned:III 25-44 leads us in a straight way  from  Livy  III  to  Livy  X.Fur- thermore,Machiavelli   uses   the   se- quence  of  his   Livy   references   for indicating his own plan as little in III as he  did  in  I.On  the  other  hand,III contains   proportionately   the   same number  of Livy  quotations  in  Latin and of chapters containing Livy quo- tations  in  Latin  as  does  II.(But  III contains   a   proportionately    smaller number  of  chapters  containing  Livy references than does II:out  of  the  49 chapters  of  III,26  contain  Livy  ref- ere3n8c.sc.ording     to    the      suggestions of  the   chapter   headings,approximate- ly   the   same   number   of   chapters   in
III  12-49  are  devoted  to  domestic  af- fairs   as  to   foreign  affairs.As  for  the alternation      mentioned,cf.e.g.III      42 (foreign),43(domestic),44(am-
biguous),45(foreign),46-47(domes- tic),48(foreign),49(domestic).Cf.
III  II  where  the  relation  of  the   one senate  to  the  many  tribunes  is  used as   an   exact   parallel   to   the   relation between   one   state   and   a   hostile   al- liaeI.    r   end,II   pr.end,III   r   end. The  reference  to  III  16  in  II  20(a certain  subject  will  be  discussed"in its  place  in  this  part")suggests  that
II and III form a single"part"; it  still leaves  it  open  whether"this  part"is the last part;the reference also under- lines the particularly close connection




》316《
between II and III.
40.III     3,2I,22,23,25     and     49.Al- together  8  names  of  individual  human beings  are  mentioned  in  chapter  head- ings  of  the   Discourses,the  names  of 7  Romans   and   of  the   most   famous enemy    of    the    Romans    who    was known   to   the   Romans   while  they  were    still    incorrupted.Consider    also the   use   of   expressions   referring   to human  individuals  like uno   capitano, uno   cittadino,uno   e  non  molti,uno (i.e.someone)in   chapter   headings   of
I,(,)I,I h,I, 1a8b,n,,3 f,  such    ex-
pressions   from   headings   in   II   and their   great   rarity   in   I(48,50,52,54). (For   an   obvious   reason   I   disregard the  use  of  uno   principe   in   chapter headings.)
41.Discourses  I  37;Livy  II  44.5  and 54.2-10.Cf.Di    scourse s     I     52(204) about   the   difference   between“public deliberations”of   a    populist   intention and"secret"actions    of   an    anti-demo- cratic  character  as  well  as  I  59  about Themistocles'private      and      dishonest counsel   and   its   repudiation   by   the honest  Aristides  and  by  the  Athenian people.
42.Cf.the   reference   to   Romulus   in IIr(328)with    that    to    Rome's    "first legislator"in        IIr(23I).Cf.also        the reference   to   Timoleon   in   II  5  with  its  only  parallels  in  I  Io  and  I  17,and also  the  kinship  of  the  argument  of II   I   with   that   of   I   37   ff.Both   I 8   and   I   8   are   devoted   to   Manlius Capitolinus(cf.the    reference    in    both chapters  to  the  Padri; that   expression also   occurs  in  III  5  and   I   49;it   is meant  to  remind  us  of  a  certain  kin- ship  between  the  aristocracy  of  pagan Rome  and  the  hierarchy  of  Christian Rome).
43.Cf.I  r  end  and  I5  end.
44.A  founder  captain  in  the  full sense of the term is a man or a god who,after  having  founded  a  society and  after  having  died,still  protects it  and  therefore  in  a  sense  rules  it; an example is Romulus (cf.  Livy    II

NOTES

I7.6   and   I   16.3-8).
45. Cf. the  usage  in  I  58-59.Cf. the reference  to  Nicias  in  III   16  with  the only    other    reference    to    him,which occurs  in  I  53 ·
46.The  parallel  in  Boccaccio's  con- text  is  the  contrast  between  Lamber- tuccio  and  Leonetto  in  the  66th  story of the  Decameron.
47. Some  of the lessons stated in the last  section (III  35-49)had   been   stated in  earlier  parts  of  the  book  with  suf- ficient    clarity,and    all    the    lessons stated  there  together  with  their  Livian pegs  could  easily  have  been  distrib- uted   among   various   earlier   sections. The   only   link   between  the  chapters  of  the  section  might  seem  to  be  the Livian   order.Closer   inspection   shows that  even  there  Machiavelli   impresses his   form   on   the   Livian   matter.After having  indicated  the  theme  in  III  35, he    turns    to    the"French"who    com- bine   courage   and   cowardice   in   an astonishing    way(36)or    who    lost    a war  because  they  were  disturbed  by “something   of   little   importance”(37); he   returns   to   the   “French”in   43   ff. The   intervening   chapters   deal   with "feigned     battles"     as     distinguished  from         a"true         fight”(38),with“an image   of   war”as   distinguished   from war       itself(39)and       with       "fraud" (40-42);i.e.they     deal     with     various kinds   of   useful   untruth    as    distin- guished   from  the  truth:      II     39,the I32d  chapter  of  the  Discourses, is  the only   chapter   of   either   book   which speaks  with  considerable  emphasis of "knowledge"and              of"science."The remaining   seven   chapters   deal   with two    related    subjects:the“F      rench” who  now  reveal  themselves  as  people “of  little   faith”(43)o r  as  people who are   equally   capable  of   being   fright- ened   and   not   being   frightened   by the   Pope (44) or   as  people   who are erroneously     afraid(48)on     the     one hand,and“Fabius,”prudence            incar- nate,on   the   other(45-47   and   49).
The     French     represent     Machiavelli's unreliable        allies.   "Fabius"       however



NOTES
"judged  the  slow  attack  to  be  more useful  and  reserved  his  impetus  for the  end"”and“moved  by  love  of  his fatherland”expressed  his  feelings  not by   speech   but   by"silence   and   in many  other  ways.”
48.As  regards  the  connection  be- tween  the  end  of  I  and  the  end  of II,see  note  36  above.The  connection  between  the  last  section  of  II   and that of III is indicated by the fact that the  last  reference  to  Livy  in  II  and  the last reference to Livy in III guide  us  towards  immediately  neighboring passages  in  Livy(II  33  toward  Livy
IX  35-36,and  III  46  toward  Livy  IX
33-43)L.ivy   IX   36.14   and   36.I-6.Cf.
note  47   above.As   for   the   relation
between  the  different  Fabii, cf.Dis-
courses III 46.
5o.It is because  of the phenomena of  servility  and  of  obliqueness  that the histories  of the  Roman  emperors have   to   be“well   considered”:I   IO (123).
51.Machiavelli  mentions  principali- ties  in  the  heading   of  I   10;in   the  heading   of   the   preceding   chapters  only  republics  had  been   mentioned. This  step  too  serves  to  prepare  the  introduction  of  the  first  Livy  quota- tion   in   Latin:Machiavelli's   use   of  Livy is misunderstood if republics or  republicanism are taken to be the sole  or  even  the  chief theme  of the  Dis- courses.In    I     I2  he  refers   to“   the Christian    republic.”He    thus    indi- cates that  "republic"  does  not  neces- sarily mean a kind of merely political  society. To  the  extent  to which he  is  critical  of   “the  Christian  republic,” he is not necessarily committed to the  ancient   Roman   republic:he   praises  certain Muslim principalities as highly  as  the  ancient    Roman    republic(II  pr.).The  issue  posed  for  him  by"the  Christian  republic"transcends  the  is- sue posed  for  him by the  alternative  of purely political republics and pure- ly  political  principalities(consider  the first  sentence  of the  Prince).

》3 17《
52.The    restoration     of    something which   has   been   disestablished   for   a long  time  is  no  less  revolutionary  or shocking    than    the    introduction    of something    wholly     new;cf.Discourses I       9(II9,I20-I2I),37,III       8(362).
53.I          I(126); Prince       ch.6.Cf.
Marsilius   of   Padua,Defensor Pacis,
I,cap.5.sect.I0.-II.Discourses                     I
II-I5  is  the  only  section  in  which  the
headings  of  all   chapters   contain  prop-
er  names.
54.Livy  V  22.5.
55.Discourses    I    II-I2.Cf.the    re- mark  in  I  II  that“Ly  curgus,Solon   and   many   others”had   recourse   to God  in  order  to  give  authority  to their    laws,with    the    reference    to “Moses,Lycurgus,Solon    and    other founders"in   I   9.Observe   the   man- ner  in which  Machiavelli,as  it  were, trains  his  reader  in  thinking  as  a pagan:"the  gods  who  predicted  thee thy  future  good  or  thy  future  evil .. .”(I     I2).
56. He  also mentions  Jupiter,J uno and  Apollo  once  in  that  section.The monotheistic expression occurs,as one would   expect,in   the   first   chapter of the  section,while  the  polytheistic expressions  occur  in  the  following chapters.
57.I                I2(129-I30)and                13(133).
58.II3(cf.Livy              III              I7.I-8)and 54.Machiavelli also changes the name of    P.Valerius(the     consul)into     P. Ruberius;one   is   tempted   to   trans- form   the   latter   name   into   Italian. While  I  II  and  12  contain  both  an- cient    and    modern    examples,I    I3 and 14 contain only ancient examples: one of the  ancient examples in  each of these  chapters  serves  as  a  substi- tute  for  the  modern  example  which is  required by  the  drift  of the  argu- me5t.Discourses    I    14;Livy   X   40,V 15.I   and   I   34.9(cf.Cicero, De  divi- natione  I  3).According  to Discourses I  II  beginning,not  Numa,the   found- er   of   the   Roman   religion,but   the senate which elected Numa as Romu-



》318《
lus'successor  was  inspired  by  heaven.
6o. Florentine       Histories      I      9.Cf.
Livy   IX   46.6-7,a   passage   which   im- mediately     precedes     the  passage     on which   the   end   of   the   Discours es   is based.
61.I    19.When   re-telling   the   story of   Roman    arms   and   Samnite   reli-  gion   in   I   I5,Machiavelli   does   not  make  any  changes  except  that  in  sum-  marizing  the  speech  of  the  consul  he  changes    the     order    of"gods,citizens, enemies”(Livy    X    39.17)in    such    a  way  as  to  bring  "gods"into  the  cen-  ter,and    in    enumerating    the    former  allies  of  the  Samnites  he  changes  the  order         of“Tuscans,Umbrians,French” (Livy  X   3I.I3)in   such   a  way  as  to  bring    the    French    into    the    center. As   for   the   subject"the   French" see noe2. 4f.aogvh.e    treatment  accorded  to the tyrant Nabis in I 4o with the only  earlier  reference  to  him(I   1o).
None of the six quotations from Livy in   I   40   is   completely   literal.E.g, the   first  quotation  begins  in  Livy (III   35.6)with   profecto,for     which Machiavelli substitutes credebant  en- im.As  regards  Appius  Claudius  as lawgiver,cf.Livy    II    56.9,58.2    and 34.6- 7.
63.Cf.page   49   and   note   5I   above. For   the   pre-history   of   this   view,cf. Alfarabius,  Compendium   Legum   Pla- tonis ,IV    and    V(edited     and    trans- lated    by    F.Gabrieli,pp.I7    and    21): tyrannide    ...   opus   esse   ut   legis
di  elt  raocoheimlli  ss.es,as  he
emphasizes,only one Roman example; he uses thereafter two Florentine ex- amples  and  then,although  the  previ- ous examples are  said to  suffice,one  ancient   Tuscan   example;in   I   8,the  chapter   on   calumnies,he   uses   one  Roman  example  and,as  he  empha- sizes,only   one   Florentine   example  out of many;in that chapter he refers  more clearly to"the histories of Flor- ence”than  to  Livy,to  whom  he  re- fers only by  speaking of “this text.”

NOTES

"We”in     the     sense     of“we     Floren- tines"occurs  for  the  first  time  in  the Discourses  in  I  8.
65.I   7,III   30(4Io);letter   to   [Ric- ciardo    Bechi],March    8,I497.
66.I   7-8.Note   the   reference   to- ward  the  end  of  the  7th  chapter  to the   present   name   of   Lombardy:in important  respects   only   the   names have   changed   since   antiquity   (cf.  Florentine Histories I  5);for the men who  are  born  in  a  country  preserve through  all  times  more  or  less  the same     nature(Discourses   III   43;cf.
II  4  toward  the  end).Note  also  the fact  that  the   first   quotations   from Livy  in  Latin  occur  within  the  con- text  of   a  Tuscan  story  (I    12). Cf. page  93  above.In  the  Livian  story about ancient Tuscany to which Ma- chiavelli  explicitly refers  in  I  7,Livy speaks  of the  violation  of  the  wife of  the   Tuscan   Arruns   by   another Tuscan(Livy   V   33.3)whereas   Ma- chiavelli  speaks  of the  violation  of the   sister   of   Arruns.Was   Machia- velli's  Arruns  married,or  did  he  live in  celibacy,or  did  he  live  in  incest with his  sister  like  the  modern  Tus- can  Baglioni  who  is  described  as  a cowardly  enemy  of  a  Pope  twenty  chapters    later?At    any    rate,Arruns called  in  the  French  against  his  fa- therland in order to revenge himself, just as the Popes called in the French against the Lombards  and  other  Ital-
ian     powers(cf. Florentine
I  7a.d22n)d  g.
68.I        I7,20,25-26(cf.III
30(409);cf.I  22  and  24  for  further criticism  of  Rome  under  the  kings. As  for  the  praise  of  Rome  in  I  28, cf.pages 36-37 above.
69.From  this  one  may  understand why Machiavelli's use of Livian pass- ages  as  pegs  in,say,the  second  half of the  First  Book  does  not  lead  be- yond  Livy  VII.
70.I   3I(Livy   V   8)and   32.
7I. I  34(cf.I  33);observe  in  I  34 (17I-172)the   four-fold   reference   to



NOTES
(dictatorship    or)"a     similar    mode  (authority )”: dictatorship  is  not  in- dispensable.Machiavelli    draws    our attention  to  the  question  concerning the maximum time for which the dic- tator   was   appointed   but   does   not answer   it;he   speaks   of“a   definite time”or  “a  short  time”or  "the  proper time."Could  he  have  wished  to  in- dicate   that   the   temporal   limitation of emergency powers is unwise since the  length  of  emergencies  cannot  be foreseen?At   any   rate,as   is   shown by   the  examples  of  Sparta  and  of Venice,one  does  not  run  any  danger in   giving   authority   to   men"for   a long  time”if  one  provides  for  guar- dians   in   the   Spartan    or   Venetian manner  (I   34-35).Note  also  the  ref- erence  in I  34 end to a Roman alter- native  to  dictatorship.Cf.    Spinoza, Trttus 3; iIticus6,c( 9.I)OA.s        regards Machiavelli's    suppressing   a   part   of Livy's  account  of  the  misdeeds  which the    Roman    nobility    committed    in connectio n  with  the  agrarian   law, see pages   I03-104  above ;cf.     also    page 377a3b .m   this   we   understand   why in  I  39 the modern  example precedes the  ancient  example.
74.II   13(265),III        I(327-328,33I)
and  I  2(97).Cf.the   deviations   from
the   Roman   model   in   the   Art   of
War,II(484-485),III(512,              535)
and     VI(57I),  and  the  remarks  on
ancient   and   modern  examples   ibid.
III(523  and   530)and      VII(6o6).
75. I      40(184-185);cf. I  44  begin- ning.Machiavelli  replaces  “many  er-  rors   committed   by   the   senate  and the  plebs” (I  4o  near  the  beginning)  by"the  error  of  the  Roman  people" (end   of     the    chapter),while  using  "people”and   “plebs"synonymously    in  the  chapter;cf.the  allusion  to  the power  of the  senate  under  both  dic- tatorship   and   decemvirate   in   I   35
(I7)I.Liv4y9(1I9I)a.7,35.7,IbVegin. n7g..
77. The   central   example   is   that   of

》3 19《
Saguntum.Saguntum   was    allied   to Rome and was ruined because it ad- hered to  Rome.Machiavelli  does  not speak  of the  conduct  of the  Roman towards   the   Saguntines;to   say   the least,that   conduct   does   not   prove that  the  Romans  were  faithful  allies (cf.Livy  XXI   16.2  and   19.9-II,also XXXI  7).
78.Cf.page   96  above.
79.Cf.note     I9     above.
8o.II        I        beginning,2(beginning and  238-240).To  see  the  progress  of the   argument,compare   II   2   with   the indictment,not   of   the   Roman   repub- lic,but    of    Caesar,the    destroyer    of
the  Roman  republic  in  I  Io. 8r.  Cf.  I   55 (212).
82.II       14,I9       end,20;  Prince   chs. I2(  39)  and     13(43-44).Cf.    pages  96- 97 above.
83.II   20-2I,25.Livy   says   that   the Romans  sent  prefects  to  Capua  while Machiavelli    speaks    of    a    praetor;a few  lines  later  on,Machiavelli  speaks of  a  prefect   sent  by   Rome  to  An- tium  whereas  Livy  speaks  of  patrons (Livy    IX    20.5    and    10);cf.III    I2 (371).Machiavelli's   silence   about   the  patrons   through   whom   the   Romans ruled  their   subjects  is  reinforced  by the   fact  that  the   explicit   Latin  Livy quotation   which   follows   that   silence in  II  2r  is  not  quite  literal.In  I  II, he  says  of  Numa  Pompilius  that  he desired   to   rule   the   Romans   by"the arts   of   peace”and    therefore    turned to        religion;cf.I        I2(I30).Cf.pages
4243I,I99-I08; I  1081-I9( 8)ab“vuet.hor- ity” is  mentioned  also  in  the  headings of   I    34,44,54    and    III    30.Cf.page 4I above.
85.Cf.ch.2,note    4o    and    ch.3,note
69     above.Discourses       I       2(97),II (I26),53(207);Prince,ch.6(I9).
Compare    the   remark    about    l'avara natura  de’prelati  e  religiosi  in  Opere  I  68o  with  the  allusion  to  the  avarice of the  ancient  Roman  nobility  in  Dis- cos  I t7e· spirit  of his boundless



》320《
praise of the Roman consuls in Dis- courses I 20, Machiavelli suppresses the   fact   that   the   imprudent   com- mander  was  a  consul  but  he  points out  that  the  situation  was  saved  by the   prudence   of   a   tribune.Cf.the unnecessary reference to the  consuls
in the third example in which no ex- plicit mention of Roman imprudence occurs.
87.Livy        II        45-46.
88.Livy          IV         28.4.Cf. pages    52-53 above.
89.Machiavelli sometimes says "he who  will  read  the  history,"i.e.who will read it after having been tutored by   Machiavelli;see   I   I   beginning (cf.I           pr.[9o]),23(152),II13(264),  18(283),20(290),III               3(333),46 towards the end.He conveys the same thought by saying e.g."he who reads the   Bible   judiciously,will    see”;cf.
III  30(409)with  I  28  beginning.The  references   to"the   text"or“this   text” or"the   text   of   Livy,"especially   if  they  are  not  preceded  by  quotations  from    Livy,indicates    the    necessity  of reading the whole context in Livy;  there  occur,if  I  am  not  mistaken,18  references   to"the   text,""this   text," or“the   text   of   Livy”in    the   Dis-
couss C.f.   III   6(351).
9r.II    29.The    other    chapter,the heading of which consists of a Livian statement  almost  literally  translated, is   I   57;it   follows   immediately   a chapter  which  is  of  utmost  impor- tance for what one may call Machia- velli's  theology.(The  heading  of  III 36,which  reproduces  a  Livian  sen- tence,differs fundamentally and char- acteristically  from  that  sentence  be- cause  it  begins  with  the  non-Livian words“The   causes   why”).
92.Cf.e.g  .Discourses  I  7  and 28.
93.Livy    IV  23.I-3.
94. I    16   near   the   beginning;cf.
the  juxtaposition   of   "histories"and “memories   of   ancient   things”in   I 10(I22);as   regards   the   relation   of "histories”and“memories,"cf.also

NOTES

I      4(242)and       5 ( 247).
95.See  the  distinction  between   "the histories”and    what“every    one    who lives   at  present  knows”in  I  29(16o).
Consider  Machiavelli's  use  of  the  ex-
pression      “everybody      knows”which
points  precisely  to  the   fact  that   only
"the  fresh  examples"are  truly  known;
cf.I      2I(149), 23(I  52)-cf.   24 (I54)一
56,II           I2(261),2I(292),III           6(355)
and           43(436).Cf.also   the   distinction
between    what    is    read    and    what    is
seen     in     III     42(435); cf.   I       58(217-
218).Cf.     Art   of  War  II(4   8o).
96.I         8(I17),40 (186),54,III    26; cf.I   52   beginning   and   II   38   begin- ning.In   his   summary,called   by   him "this  text,"of  the  Livian  story  of  the Decemvirate,Machiavelli      says-I      40 (184)—deviating   from   Livy(III   33.7)  that   Appius   Claudius   had   taken   on “a    new    nature”;when    referring    to this  remark  in  I  41,he   says  that  Ap- pius   Claudius   had   “changed   nature, as  I  say  above”(the  emphasis  is  not in      the      original).Cf.the      reference in   the   Ep.Ded.to   Machiavelli's   nar- ratives   in   the    Discourses  as  distin- guished   from   his   discourses   in   that bo. I   29(161),     40(186);cf.Livy
III        44-48.Machiavelli   justifies    his treatment    of    the    Virginia    incident by  what  he  says  of  the  rape  of  Lu- cretia  in  III 5.
98.I     29(159);the     reference     to Tacitus  contrasts  with  I  28  begin- ning,where   Machiavelli   gathers   a  certain   conclusion   from   what   "he  has  read  of  the  things  done  by  re- publics”and   then“seeks   the   cause” of  the  phenomenon   in  question.Cf. note gr above on the heading of III  36.
99.I         37(175)and         39         beginning.
Cf.note      85      above.
1o0.I   46.Cf.the   reference   toward the  end  of  the  chapter  to"the  rea- sons   which   I   stated   above,"i.e.the reasons  not  stated  by  Livy.In  this chapter,which  opens  the  section  on the  plebs  or  the  multitude,Machia-




NOTES

velli  refers  twice  to  what  he  had
said  earlier;he  thus  refers  to  I  33,
the  chapter  which  opens  the  section
on  the  ruling  class  or"the  princes."
Ior.I    47.  Livy     XXIII     2.I-2,4.
102.I    57.Cf.note    gr  above.
I03.I           4(I05),  33   (169)and        52
(205).
I04.Prince,  chs.6(18)and            I(36).
Cf.  Discourses    I    18   end("of   which
we  reason  in  this  chapter").
Io5.No     chapter     other     than     Dis-
courses     I    17    begins    with"“I   judge,"
whereas    there    are    two    chapters    be-

26). Cf.  the“  one   ought   to   believe”
in   the   heading   of   II   48(see   page
36    above). The    central     scene    of
La  Mandragola    opens    with“I     be-
lieve    that    you    believe,"the    second
scene        with“I        believe”(Nicia)and
the   third   scene   with“I   do   not   be-
lieve”(Ligurio    ). Two   Books   of  the
Art   of   War  (II    and    VI)open    with
“I              believe.”Cf.Montesquieu,Con-
sidérations sur les causes de la gran-
deur  des  Romains  et  de  leur  déca-
dence, ch.  I 0.
1o6.I   58        beginning.Cf.I        1o(I24)
and    Art   of   War            IV(550).Cf.pages
41,107     and     I5-116     as     well     as     ch.
2, note  20  above.
107.I   6o   and   II   pr.(230); Prince ch.  25   end; Art  of  War  I(454,473)     and  III(5I2).
108.I                 2(100-102),5-6,16(139), 37(178),      44;  Prince    chs.   9(32)and
8.Note   that   the    Discourses     end   with the     praise      of     an      anti-democratic
measure.
1o9. Prince  ch.  9;Discourses   I   40 (183,186-187),52    end.Observe    the  contrast   in   terminology   between   I Io  and  I   16,and  the  remark  about  terminology  in  I  25  end;in  II  9  be- ginning,Machiavelli  calls  the  Roman republic  a  principality,and   in  II   12 (263)he     calls  the  Roman  republic  and the Swiss confederacy kingdoms. 7lo5r-nnpeagisri ,dIIInot1e3. IivboeI I1o.See   pages   II2-II3     and   I24-I26

》32I《
above.      Cf . Florentine         Histories     II
34(104),36(109),37(II2),4r                        end, III        17        end,18        beginning,20(157), VI            24(306).Cf. Discourses      I   28-29 with       Opere       II(704-707).
III.Consider    the    meaning     of    "uni-
versal     opinion”in     II      17     beginning.
II2.  Prince      ch.18     end; Discourses  I             4(105),I(I26),25             beginning, 47-48,50(202),5I                   beginning,53,II 22        beginning,III        I4,34;letter        to Guicciardini     of     March     I5,I525.
I3.See  the  end  of  I  58  and  the heading of I 59;cf.also I 29 to which Machiavelli refers in I 58.
II4.I        58(220);cf.I        9(120).
II5.I   25,32   heading   and   beginning, 45     end,47(cf.the     heading     and     the beginning with the end of the chap- ter),II   22   heading   and   beginning.
I16.Voltaire,D      ictionnaire      Philoso- phique,ed.by       Julien       Benda,I       165 and         18o:"Les         empereurs(romains), il  est  vrai,les  grands  et  les  philosophes, n'avaient    nulle    foi    à    ces    mystères;
mais   le   peuple,qui   en   fait   de   religion donne   la   loi   aux   grands,leur   imposait la   nécessité   de   se   conformer   en   ap- parence      à      son      culte.Il      faut,pour Ienchainer,paraitre     porter     les     memes chaines     que     lui.”“...le     petit     peuple, toujours       fanatique   et    toujours     bar- bare."Cf.Di     scourses    I   I   towards   the end.
117. Prince,   Ep.Ded.and             ch.6 (19);Discourses      I      II(I26),53(207),  I    13; Florentine   Histories   III   I3.Cf. note  49  above.
I18.Consider     the     relation     between the     analysis   of   religion     in    I    II-I5 and   the   condemnation   of   tyranny    in I    9-10,and    the    relation    between    the criticism   of   Christianity   in   II   2   and the         praise         of(democratic)republics which    surrounds    that    criticism.
II9.Cf.pages      28-29      above.
I20.Livy  I  7,Io  and  12; Discourses I    I(126)and    2(98-10o).—Compare  Aristotle's   account   of   the"natural” genesis   and   character   of  the   city  with  what  Fustel  de  Coulanges  re- ports  in  La  Cité  Antique  regarding



》322《
the"sacred"city.
I21.Livy    III    6.5;Discourses    I    38 (179,I8I).
I22.Livy    III    56.7;Discourses    I    4I
and   45   beginning.
I23.Livy   V   23.8   and   25.7;Dis- courses I 55 beginning.
I24.Livy    I    26.I2;Discourses    I    22. I25.Livy       V   39.9-I2,40.3-4         and
40.7-10;Di  scourses    IⅡ   29(315).
I26.Livy     V     49.I(cf.X      16.6);Dis-
courses   II  30  beginning.
I27.Livy    VIII    9.I0,I3    and     10.7;
Discourses II     16(270).
I28. Livy   VIII    I3.I4;   Discourses    I 23(296)and     II     r     beginning.
I29.Cf .Discourses     I   1o  beginning and   end,II   2(337)and   II    18; Prince ch.I3(43).
I30.III         30(4ro).
I3I.Cf.page    I22    above.
132.I    46.The    only    other    example  of   this   kind    occurs   in   II   I3   where  Xenophon    is    said    to    have     “made” Cyrus    do    certain    things.In    the    first  two   quotations   from   Dante   and   Vir-  gil(I    II    and    2r),Machiavelli    ascribes  to   Dante   what   is   said   to   Dante   by  Sordello    and    he    ascribes    to    Virgil  what   is   said   to   Virgil   by   Anchises.
133.Cf.E     sortazione    alla    penitenza (Opere   II   8or-804).
I34.In    the    First    Book,expressions of   this   kind   occur   6   times,in   the Second    Book    7    times,and    in    the Third    Book  5 times;they     all    apply to      Livian“texts.”
135.There    occur    7    such    cases.Cf. also     II     2(239):“Titus     Livius     con- fesses it.”
136.III         3r         beginning;cf.III         12 toward    the     end.
137.Cf.D    iscourses      I     1o(I22-I23) and    18    end;  Prince     chs.6    and    26
(82);see   page   42   above.
138.Livy    IX4    and    8-Ir.The    Livian story    is    a    commentary    on    the    end of  Discourses    II        13.Cf.  Discourses
I    15    and    III    I2(372-373).See    page II7    above.
139.III  12.The  expression  of Mes- sius-Livy  which  Machiavelli   quotes

NOTES

is"necessity   is   the   last   and   greatest weapon.”-  Cf.  page   I20   above.
I40.This   is   not   to   deny   that   the problem  of  the  relation   of  Christian- ity   to   Judaism   is   somehow   present in     the     chapter     under     discussion. When    referring    there    to    the"new law”     of    Christianity,      Machiavelli  makes   us   think   of   “the   old   law.” Besides,Machiavelli    could    not    help  being  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  Ro-  man   Church   persecuted    Judaism   as  well   as   paganism   and   that   it   pre- served  the  Latin  version  of  the   Old  Testament   as   much   as   it   preserved parts   of   the   pagan   Latin   literature.
I4I.II                     2(235),4(242,246),5; cf.I                        pr.(9o),Io(I22),I2(I29), III   14   end   and   39.See   notes   9   and 59  above.
I42.Cf.page      I4I      above      with,e.g, Psalm   I4. I.
143.In    Prince      ch.26,he    calls    cer- tain    contemporary     events     which    re- mind   us   of   Biblical   miracles,"extraor- dinary     events     without     example.”
144.II                2(239,240),4(245),5,I9
(285),III              6(35I-352),39(43I),43
(436)and    48(cf.heading    and    body). Cf.pages 4o and 73-74 as well as notes 95-96 above.
I45.Livy       VIII       II4    (Milionium dixisse   ferunt  ).
146.In   Discourses    I     18,Machia- velli says that a certain Roman mas- ter  of  the   horse  fell  in  the  battle of Sora,which was a Roman victory; according to  Livy,he  fell  in  the  bat- tle  of  Saticula,which  was  a  Roman victory;but,as  Livy  mentions  imme- diately  afterward,he  found  in  some sources  that  he  fell  in  the  battle  of Sora  and  that  that  battle  was  a  Ro- man defeat(IX 22  and 23.5).Machia- velli  prefers,just  as  Livy,the  version more  favorable  to  the  Romans,but, differing from Livy,he is silent about the  other  version;yet  he  alludes  to that  other  version  by  replacing  one battle by another;he thus shows how easily  undesirable  traditions  can  be suppressed and how this  suppression




NOTES
can  safely  be  counteracted .See  es- pecially Livy IX 22.9-IO.
147.I     3     beginning,II     I3(264),18 (28I,283   ), III       20(389), 22    (394)  and   30(4Io).For   the   sequel   consider
I   142.(T3)。last  word  of  the   chapter
is“celebrated”;Machiavelli,in          the last  sentence,speaks  of  the  fact  that poverty  has  brought  honor  not  only to  cities  and  countries  but  to  reli- gions  as  well  and    that"this   matter has  been  celebrated  many  times  by other  men.”
149.Livy           II           12.8,I3.I0(B.O. Foster's   translation),I9.2   and   29.r.Cf. Discourse s  I  20  and  Prince   ch.   I5.一 In Discourses   III  25  Machiavelli  cites Livy's“golden           words"in  praise  of  poverty;   in    III    6(338)he    quotes    a  “golden    sentence”of    Tacitus    which  enjoins    obedience   to   princes;III    26 is  the  only  chapter  in  which  Machia- velli  speaks  of  both  Lucretia  and  Vir- ginia(the   great   examples   of  chastity). There   occur   no   other   references   to golden    words    or    sentences    in    the DiuCrsa.ges       127-I30      above.
I5I.Cf.      Discourses    III  33    with     I 14   and   III   32   with   I    15;cf.I   12(I28). See    also    I    47(197)and   III   14; Livy  VI     29.I-2.-After     having     given     the two     Livy     quotations     referred   to   in the      text,Machiavelli       gives    still    an- other     Livy     quotation;but     this    time he   quotes   Livy   speaking   in   his   own name;    the     third     quotation     has     no bearing      on"little      things."That      quo- tation     occurs   as   a   part   of   a   sum- mary   of   a   Livian        story(VI      30)in which     Machiavelli       replaces       Livy's “military    tribunes   with    consular   pow- er "by“c      onsuls”  ;a   s  a  consequence    we     here    get     another     Machiavellian example     of     the     early     Romans'poor choice    of   consuls(cf.page    I49 above).
152.Livy     VIII     30.I-2,3I.I-2    and    8, 32.4-5,  7,I7,33·3,         II,I3.    -Cf.    pages
I06-107 above.
I53. By omitting Livy's inquit (VII
32.I2) Machiavelli slightly blurs the

》323《
change from indirect to direct speech, and  thus  weakens  the  emphasis  on the sentence quoted in the text.
154.III    38.The    subject    of   this chapter  as  indicated  at  the  end  of
III 37 is "how the make of a captain ought   to   be,"just   as   III   36   dealt with “how the make of a good militia ought   to   be.”It   appears   from   the quotations  on  which  the  arguments of II  38  and  36  are  based,that  the good militia must have reverence for the  gods,whereas  no  such  demand is    made    on    captains(cf.page    73 above). Both   quotations   are   taken from  public   speeches.-The  descrip- tion  of  the  subject  of  II  38  which is given in the heading as well as in the  body  of  that  chapter("how  the make of a captain in whom his army can  have  confidence  ought  to  be”) brings   out  the   connection   of  that chapter  with  III  33,i.e.the  last  pre- ceding  chapter  that  was  concerned with the difference between Livy and his characters.The description of the subject  of  III  38 which is  given  at the  end  of III  37,conceals  that  con- nection.In   accordance  with  this,the words  of which Machiavelli  says  in
III   38   that   Livy“makes”his   char- acter“say”them,are      called     words
of  that  character  at  the  end  of  III
to draw our attention to the connec-
tion  between  two  chapters  dealing
with  the   difference   between   Livy
and  his  characters  and  therewith  to
that   difference   itself   (cf.the   end
of the present paragraph  of the text
on  III  39).For  the  reason  stated  in
the preceding paragraph  of the  text,
he thus  also  draws  our  attention  to
the plan of the  Discourses.
155.III  37  toward  the  end  and  33 end.Cf.pages    I43-144    above.
156.Cf.note    47    above.
157.As   appears   also   from   I   23,the captain   must   be   a   knower   of   sites especially   in   the   sense   that   he   must know  how   to   conduct  himself  in   re- gard  to  various  kinds   of  sites.For  in-




》324《
stance,he     must  know  that  it  is  im- prudent"to    hold    difficult    places"or to  hold  places  which  are  narrow  and in   which   only   a   few   can   stay   and live.Such“malignancy     of     site”favors the  attacker  rather  than  the  defender. In   addition,the   attacker   will   always find“an      unknown      road”which      is not    guarded    by    the    defender.(This summary   should   suffice   to   dispose of   Guicciardini's    objections    to    the thesis     of     the     chapter.)Machiavelli uses  the  second  person  singular  in  I 23  more  frequently  than  in  any  other chapter    of   the    First    Book;he    ad- dresses   first   the   defender   with   the counsel  to  abandon  places  which  are narrow   and   in   which   only   a   few can   stay,and   thereafter   he   addresses the   attacker  with   a  promise  that  he will   surely   find   an   unknown   road. Since  the  example  of  the  country  to be   defended   or   attacked   is   Italy,he gives  his  advice  to  both  the  defender and   the   would-be   foreign   conqueror of 1a.lCyf.pages       I37-I38       above.
I59.Livy   XXXIX   25: populum  Ro-
manum,qui caritate magis quam metu
adjungere sibi   socios   mallet. ...
16o.Cf.    pages     I03-104     above(on
Discourses  I  37).
16r.See  page  140  above.In  III  27,
Machiavelli   contrasts   a   harsh   and
effective measure of the Romans with
an ineffective and soft or weak meas-
ure  of Florence which,being  a  mod-
ern    republic,is“a    weak    republic”;
“the  weakness  of  the  men   of  the
present time is caused by their weak
education   and   little   knowledge   of
things”;"certain  modern  opinions  of
theirs”which   are“altogether   remote
from the truth,"“arise from the weak-
ness of him who is lord.”III 27 deals
with   the   same“text”as   III   26,the
chapter    on    women.According    to
Savonarola(P rediche sopra Ezechiele
Ⅱ),the     savi  del mondo  regard   the
biblical prophecies as cose da donne.
Cf. also III  r  (330), and  cf.the   dis-
cussion  of  the  middle  way  in  I  27

NOTES

with   I   26.
162.Gods   are   mentioned   in   the
Second Book only in chapters r and
23;the   first  mention  occurs  in  the
summary  of  an  argument  from  Plu-
tarch;the  last  mention  occurs  in  a
quotation  from  Livy;in  the  Second
Book  Machiavelli  himself  does  not
even  speak  of  gods.In   every  Book
of the Discourses there occurs a single
quotation  from  Livy  in  which  gods
are   mentioned;see   I   I3,II   23   and
III  36.-Note  the  density  of  “Pope”
and“Church”in   II   22,in   a   chapter
in   which   no   reference   to   Livy(or
an63oItIh r3  wiehr)arisn.s  unusually
extensive quotations from Livy,is the
only  chapter  in  the   series  II  22-27
which   contains   references   to   Livy
(for  the  meaning   of  “references   to
Livy,"see  note  2r  above).In  II  23,
Livy is presented as making Camillus
speak  of  what  the  gods  have  done.
This  prepares  the  remark  in  III  3I
according  to  which  Livy  makes  Ca-
millus  do  and  say  certain  things  in
order to  show  what  the  make  of an
excellent man is.The Biblical equiva-
lent  of the  remark  in  II  23  would
be that God makes the Biblical writ-
ers  speak  of what  God  has  done  or
that  the  Biblical  writers  make  God
say  as  to  what  God  has  done.Con-
sid1e4.IItI   p.ears    from    Livy(VII
32.I3)t  hat  the  soldiers  wrongly ac-
cused  the  commander  of  the  same
error  of  which  Messius  rightly  ac-
cused  his  soldiers  (see  pages  I40-
I4I above).-The quotation from Livy
with  which  the  chapter  opens  ap-
pears,to   begin   with,as   a   remedy
for  an  error  which“all  men”commit;
the quotation speaks of a captain who
lived   long  before   Livy's   time  but
Machiavelli speaks of him as though
he  were  still  living  in  Machiavelli's
time(367;cf.note        44     above).The
quotation   speaks  less  of  wha+  the
captain  did  or  said  than  of what  he
thought;that   thought   is,later   in   the




NOTES
chapter,ascribed     to     Livy;the     al- leged thought of the captain is known only  as  Livy's  thought.
165.II   18   and   III   30.In   the   head- ing   of   III  30 Machiavelli   speaks   of what  a  citizen  must  do  if  he  desires to  perform  any  good  deed  in  his  re- public     on     his     own     authority;the central   example   given   in  the   chapter is   that   of   Moses    who   killed“innu- merable   human   beings"in   order   that his  laws  and  his  orders  should  pros- per;  according    to   Machiavelli, Moses did  these  things  on  his  own  authority; according  to  the  Bible  it  is  not  clear whether   he   did   them   on   his   own authority  or  by  the  authority  of  God (cf.  Exodus    32.2I-26   with    ib.27-28;
cf. Numbers     i6). Cf.  also  I    9(I20). 一 “Author ,”the       grammatical   root  of “authority  ,”  occurs    in  the   sense of  "writer,"     I    believe,only     in     I    25 and   in  I  58.
166. II   10,I7,22,III        27.
167.II            17(274-275): disputare,     ri-
spondendo       dico,questo è una massima.
168.  Cf.    I       1o       end;Prince    ch.I2
(39);Art   of  War     I(485)  and   IV
(539 ).   Cf.    pages  4I,    II9,    I57   above.
169.When  Machiavelli  says  in  II 27  that  he  wishes  to  demonstrate  a certain thesis by ancient and modern examples  since  it  cannot  be  demon- strated   with   equal   distinctness   by means  of  reasons,he  does  not  mean that  he  does  not  possess  a  rational proof of his  thesis.He  thus  certainly draws   our  attention  to  his  selection of  examples.In  the  preceding  chap- ter  he  did  not  use  any  modern  ex- amples but did use an Asiatic example. In II 27 he twice discusses the same three  examples;the     center  is  occu-  pied   in   the   first  discussion  by  an Asiatic example and in the second dis- cussion  by  a  modern(Florentine)ex- ample.Modernity   and   Asia   are“ex- changeable”since    the    characteristic difference   between   modernity   and  classical  antiquity  is  due  to  the  vic- tory of Asiatic thought over classical thought.(See  pages  89-90  and  notes

》325《
16  and  35  above.)The  thesis  to  be proved concerns false hopes for vic- tory(see  page  40  above.)
I70.III    I9.Tacitus    is    referred    to
four   times   in   the   Discourses:I   29
(cf. page  I24     above),II     26(cf. page
50   above),III   6(cf.note    149    above)
and     I9.The     three     last     references
follow   one   another   at   intervals   of
I3   chapters.
I7I.Machiavelli  introduces  the  ci-
tation  with  the  Latin  ait:he     draws
our attention to the fact that he can
write  Latin;he  thus  prepares  us  for
his writing some Tacitean Latin.The
wording  of  the  citation  reminds  us
of a  statement  of Tacitus which  ex-
presses  the  opposite  opinion   to  the
apocryphal   statement   that   Machia-
velli    put    into    Tacitus'mouth.The
genuine  statement  of  Tacitus  is  im-
mediately  followed  in  his work(An-
nals  III  55)by  a  remark  which  ex-
presses  doubt   of  the   moral  superi-
ority of the olden times to the present
and which reminds one therefore of
the  argument  of  Discourses II   pr.:
Machiavelli's treatment of Tacitus as an authority is linked  to a reminder of his  own  criticism  of the  root  of theI7.eMlicfhiianvelui throerfiets.  to     a     state- ment   of   his   made   at   another   time and  adds  the  remark  that  that  state- ment  is  true;the  opinion   expressed  in that  statement  had  been  ascribed  orig- inally   to “the     ancient     writers”with the     understanding      that,being      the opinion  of  the  ancient  writers,it  is  of course  true;he  indicates  in  the  repe- tition   that  if  he  refers  to  authorities, he   does  not  necessarily   agree   with what   the   authorities   say,even   if   he does  not  voice  any  criticism  of  what they  say ;cf.III          2I(390)with   I    37
beginning.He  notes  that  “all  writers” admire   the   good   order   which   pre-  vailed  in  Hannibal's  army  and  implies  that   those   writers   were   completely  ignorant  of  the   cause   of  that   order;  cf.III      21  (391)   and   Prince      ch.I7 (54).He   quotes   a   prudent   man   who



》326《
said  that  in  order  to  keep  a  republic by   force,there  must  be   a  proportion between   him   who   forces   and   that which   is   forced;the   prudent   man   is likely   to   be    Machiavelli   himself;cf.
III    22(393)and    I    40(187).
173.Cf.pages         148-I49,notes         I49 and   165   as   well   as   ch.I,notes   48   and 68.
I74. Livy   VII   4.6-7,5.2,9     .8-I0.II.
Exodus    4.I0;I    Samuel          I7.Cf.Ma-
chiavelli's    reference    to    the    David- Goliath  story  in  Prince  ch.I3 ·

and    to    the    Sun.”Machiavelli    is    si- lent    about    Camillus'desire    to    become equal    to    the    highest    god.Note    that in   the   heading   of   III   23   Machiavelli speaks   only   of   one   cause   of   Camil- lus'exile   whereas   in   the   body   of   the chapter    he     speaks    of    three    causes. Cf.also    Discourses    III   34  on  Manlius Torquatus'concern     with     being     talked about.
I79.Livy  V  23.I.Discourses  I  4I, III  3r  beginning  and  46.“Humility” is  mentioned  in  the  headings  of  I 4I and  II  14, and  in  no  other  head- ings;the  interval  between  these  two  chapters  is  33.Cf.page  III  above.As regards  the  connection  between  the Tacitean  subsection  and  the  subsec- tion  devoted  to  the  Decemvirate,cf. also  the  use  of  "partisans"in  III  22 (395)and  the  reference  there  to   I  43;see  I  45  on  Savonarola's  “ambi- tious   and  partisan   spirit”;“partisan- ship”is    opposed   to“lukewarmness” in Prince  ch.6,in   the   part   of   the  chapter  dealing  with  armed  and  un- armed prophets;Savonarola's sermons  abound with indictments of the luke- warm     ones.Cf. Prince ch.20(67).
18o.Cf.   pages   I05   and   I53-153
above.Livy  VIII  30.I3  and  34.2.
181.Valerius  is  not,and  is,Machia- velli's   model(cf.III   37   and   38;see pages 154-155 above).This creates no difficulty;cf.Savonarola,        Prediche

NOTES
sopra  Ezechiele        XXXVII:  Pigliano
adunque Nabuchodonosor per la per- sona    di    Cristo.-O   frate,vo'tu    com- parare la persona di  Cristo a Nabucho- donosor,che fu  uno  scellerato? -N  ota che questo nonè inconveniente,perchè nella    Scrittura,molte    volte,  una per- sona  cattiva  significa una buona.
182.Cf.pages    44    and    Io8    above. Cf.the     reference     to     “every     day” need  for"new  orders"at  the  end  of  I
49  with  the  reference  to  “every   day” need     for    “new    provisions”in    the  heading  of  III    49.Cf. also   Florentine  Historie s   I   28.
183.III                  I(327-330),8(362),II
(368);cf.I          18(I43).Cf.pages          90 and   I56-157    above.The    central    ex- ample   among   the   seven   Roman   ex- amples  given  in  III  r  is  that  of  the execution    of    Manlius    Capitolinus.
Consider   the  connection    between    I
26(the   tacit   New   Testament   quota-
tion),II    26(the     only    tacit    Tacitus
quotation)and   III   26(women   as   the
causes    of   many   ruins).Cf. notes   r6
and  169  above.-Principio  or  principii
are   mentioned   in   the   headings   of
I   I,49,III   I,28,and   36.In   I 49,prin-
cipio  and  principii   occur  seven  times
in   the   body   of  the   chapter;in   III   r
they  occur  ten  times  in  the  body  of
the184chIapter. 46(I94).  Cf.Savonarola,
Sermone fatto  in  San  Marco  a'di   15
Febbraio  1497/8:dice   il   nostro   testo:

cipio  posse   ad   bonum  finem   usque
perduci.Cioè:che    le    cose    che    han-
no  cattivo  principio  impossibile  è  che
possino  aver  mai  buon fine.
185. Prince                chs.3(Io),6(I9),18 end ;Discourse  s      I      pr.beginning,II (I26,I28),I2(I29),18(145),25,
58(217),II       pr.(230),I3,III       II       to-
wards   the   end   and   30(409).Cf.pages 33,37  and   153-I54   above.
186.Machiavelli  indicates  the   sub- jects  of  both   the   chapter  on   con- spiracies(III  6)and  of  II  32  by  say- ing at the end of the preceding chap- ters  that"it  does  not  seem  to(him)




NOTES
to  be  outside  of  his  purpose”to  dis-
cuss“in   the    following    chapter”the
subject in question.As he makes clear
by  a  remark  near  the  beginning  of
III   6(332),II   32   too   deals   with   a
kind  of  conspiracy. The  heading  of
II 32 draws our attention to the num-
ber  of modes  in  which  the  Romans
seized    fortified    towns;the    central
mode proves to be"force mixed with
fraud”  or  "furtive  violence" or  trat-
tato    or"conspiracy."When    discuss-
ing   this    central   mode,Machiavelli
praises  Aratus  of  Sicyon  who,prob-
ably owing to “an occult virtue which
was in him”was an unrivalled master
in"fraudulent    and    nocturnal"enter-
prises.We   may     say   that   whereas
“the    occult    virtue”through    which
the people foresees its own good and
evil-I    58(219)—operates   in   broad
daylight  so  that  everyone  can  judge
of  the  value  of  that  virtue,the“OC-
cult  virtue”of  Aratus  operated  only
in    the    occult.(Cf.  Florentine  His-
tories  I 3  and  VIII   18).S  ince"f ur-
tive       violence”or“conspiracy”  is  a
form of faithlessness,we  are not  sur-
prised  to   observe   that   Machiavelli
introduces  the  subject  of  I 59 at   the
end  of  I  58  in  the  same  manner  in
which  he  introduces  the  subjects  of
II  32  and  III  6  at  the  ends  of  II  3I
and III  5 respectively,for the  subject
of  I 59 may  be  said  to  be  the  prob-
lem of  Roman faithfulness  (see page
II7    above).The   references    at   the
ends  of I  58,II  3I  and III  5  are  the
on l1y87oIes  2h5i,IIkinrd  binegin-
Ir,se3s4.2,344-346, 354, 355),8.    Cf.
Art  of  War   VII(609).-Brutus,who
simulated  folly  in  order   to  liberate
his  fatherland  was  not  a  conspirator;
hence Machiavelli is  silent  about his
action in the  chapter  on  conspiracies
(III,6)as   well   as   in   the  sketch  of
the   subject   matter   of  that   chapter
which he gives at the end of the pre-
ceding  chapter. As he explains in  III
6(34  0), one  cannot  say  of  a  man

》327《
who  plans  to  kill  or  to  depose  a prince,that he is a conspirator;Brutus kept  his  plan  secret  from  everyone and  patiently  waited  for  his  oppor- tunity.At  the   end   of  II   5,Machia- velli  mentions  the  arousing  of  hu- mors  against  princes  as  one  of  the subjects  of  III  6,while  in  the  repe- tition  at  the  beginning  of  II  6  he  leaves    that    subject    unmentioned;  arousing of humors against a prince  was   precisely   what   Brutus   did:he turned  the  desire  for  revenge  upon  Sextus  Tarquinius,who  had  violated  Lucretia,into desire for revenge upon  Sextus'royal  father  and  for  the  abo- lition  of  kingship   altogether   (Livy  I   58.8-10   and   59.I-2).Brutus'long- range plan was the abolition of king- ship;the  crime  of  Sextus  Tarquinius  merely   gave   him   the   opportunity. Similarly  Machiavelli  turns  the"giv- en”dissatisfaction   with“all  prelates”
(I 27)into revulsion against the whole traditional   order   and   its   ultimate
ground.-The difference between con- spiratorial      and“corrupting”writings is  adumbrated  by  the  story  of Agis and  Cleomenes  as  told  in  I  g.Agis, who desired to restore the  old  Spar- tan  order,was  killed  by  the   ephors as one who desired to  become a ty- rant;through  the  writings  which  he left,he aroused the same noble desire in his successor Cleomenes who killed all ephors and thus succeeded in com- pletely restoring the  old  Spartan  or- der.   The   action   of   Cleomenes   is described   in   III   6(355)as   a   con- spiracy   against   the   fatherland.This conspiracy  was  originated  by  writ- ings  of  Agis.Agis  was  not  hurt  by his writings and Cleomenes was great- ff bybeten. Ch.IeI    tpe.rardof hoen spaorMsancihvelionisnpshite- self by  the  sole  reference  to  Plato which   occurs   in   either   book—Dis-  courses III  6( 351)一；two   disciples  of Plato   conspired   against   two   tyrants and killed  one  of them.He  indicates




》328《
the   same   difference   by   referring   in
the   same   context   to   Pelopidas'con-
spiracy    against    the    Theban    tyrants
and   by   his   other   references   to   Pe-
lopidas   and   his   friend   Epaminondas
(see  especially  III   18  beginning  and
38);the  wealthy,married  and  spirited
Pelopidas delighted in gymnastics and
hunting   whereas   the   poor,unmar-
ried and gentle Epaminondas delighted
in listening and in seeking of wisdom;
Pelopidas  had  to  flee  from  Thebes
when the tyranny was set up,whereas
Epaminondas  could  stay  because  he
was  despised  as  inactive  on  account
of his  concern  with  wisdom  and  as
powerless on account of his poverty
(se8lIutarch's  Pelopr.i(d9ao),I.2(I29-130),I3
(133),17(141),I9(147),20,55(2II-
212),II     5, 8(    252,25 4),  III       I(327,
330)and     17     end.Cf. Florentine    His-
tories     I     1.C.Alexandre     quotes     the
following    statement    by    George    of
Trebizond     (Comparatio    Platonis   et
Aristotelis )in   his   introduction   to   his
edition   of   Gemistus   Plethon's    Tr aité
des   Lois (Paris         1858,p.xvi): Audivi
ego        ipsum        [Plethonem]Florentiae,
venit enim ad concilium cum Graecis,
asserentem unam eandemque religio-
nem     uno     animo,una     mente,una
praedicatione ,universum    orbem  pau-
cis post annis suscepturum. Cumque
rogassem,Christine an Mahumeti? Ne-
utram,inquit,sed     non      a      gentilitate
differentem一.  Percepi   etiam  a  non-
nullis    Graecis    qui    ex    Peloponneso
huc      profugerunt,  palam   dixisse    ip-
sum,anteaquam  mortem  obiiset  iam
fere    triennio,non    multis    annis   post
mortem   suam   et   Machumetum    et
Alfarabius,   Compendium     legum     Pla-
tonis, liber    3, beginning  ;Roger       Ba-
con ,Moralis     Philosophia (ed.Massa),
193,215   and   219;and   Pico   della   Mi-
randola ,Disputationes    adversus astro-
logiam   divinatricem   II   5.
18g.Cf.Machiavelli's summary of a sermon  of  Savonarola   in  his  letter to   [Ricciardo   Bechi]of  March   8th,

NOTES

1497.Cf.Savonarola's     Prediche   sopra l'Esodo XIII  on  the  difference  as  well as  the  similarity   between     "the   war of     Christ”and“the     temporal     wars of    the    world.”Machiavelli        would have  agreed  with  Savonarola's  remark (Prediche  sopra  Ezechiele   XXXVI):    lo   ti   dico   che   gli   è   un  piacere   a far guerra.
I9o.Cf.Discourses       III       I       and        12.
Cf.   pages     II9-120    above.
I91.Savonarola      Prediche   sopra   Eze-
chiele  XXXIII:   la  Chiesa ha  el corpo
misto  di  buoni  e  di  cattivi.
well  as Livy V 46.3. (See Florentine
Histories III  7  and  V  34.)The  dual
meaning   of“French”corresponds   to
the   dual   meaning   of  “Egyptians,”
"Midian,""Jebusites,"etc .in the theo-
logical  tradition.(Cf   .Machiavelli's
summary of a sermon of Savonarola
in  his  letter  to   [Ricciardo  Bechi]of
March    8,I497).In    order   to   grasp
the  moral  or  mystical  meaning  of
“Samnites,”the   third   major   subject
of Discourses III 35-49,one must start
from the fact that the Samnites were
particularly  obstinate enemies  of  the
Romans and resembled the  Swiss  in
3o  atnhdanIXo.7;rcefspte(sLi0   nI
154 above).  The  “blind  Samnites”are
simply  Machiavelli's  enemies.At  the
command  of  their   captain   Pontius,
Samnite soldiers appear“in    the guise
of   shepherds”and“agree   all”on   the
same  lie  which  deceives  the  Roman
consuls and thus brings about a Ro-
man  disaster.But  Pontius,disobeying
“the   counsels   of  the   father”or   of
"that   old   one,"   chooses   “a  middle
way,"and  thus  is  ruined  (III 40  and
II 23 end.Machiavelli does not men-
tion   the   name   of  the   father   and
changes  the  name  of the  son  which
was Gaius  into Claudius; see  III 12).
The nameless Samnite father reminds
one  of the“old  and  prudent  citizen”
Hanno who did not share Hannibal's
extravagant   hopes(II   27).While   two
Roman  consuls  were  deceived  by  a




NOTES
Samnite,a  Roman  legate  uncovered  a  similar deception attempted by the  Tuscans,at   one   time   allies   of   the  Samnites:the  Tuscans  sent  out  some  soldiers  “in  the  guise  of  shepherds” but  the  legate   found   out  that  the  speech  and  the  complexion  of  the alleged shepherds was too refined for


》329《
shepherds  or  simple  rustics;he  dis- covered   the   manifest   blunder   of Rome's  enemies  which  consisted  in claiming to be humble  and in being at  the  same  time  presumptuous(III 48;cf.Livy   X   4.9-1o).
I93.Discourses   III   45   and    39   end.
Livy  X  28.13.
